Sentence Transformers v6.0 - Multi Vector Encoders (#3501)
huggingface/blog: multi-vector-encoder.md

---
title: "Multi-Vector (Late Interaction) Embedding Models with Sentence Transformers"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/multi-vector-encoder/st-hf-lighton-thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: tomaarsen
- user: NohTow
  guest: true
  org: lightonai
- user: raphaelsty
  guest: true
  org: lightonai
---

# Multi-Vector (Late Interaction) Embedding Models with Sentence Transformers

> 

Reviewer: Due to the fact that this blog post talks about an update, how about we add a
```sh
pip install --upgrade sentence-transformers
```

Please feel free to ignore.

Reviewer 2: How about mentioning the new major version number in the title? I think it's a big deal.

Author: Good call to add this to the introduction, done in e8b1941c32f227043e52bec4de49bc9665906010

Author: @pcuenca I used to have this in the titles for the big releases (v3.0, v4.0, v5.0), but I got feedback that users felt they were perhaps outdated. E.g. a tutorial for training with v3.0 when the latest release is v5.6 doesn't really seem nice.

> [Sentence Transformers](https://sbert.net/) is a Python library for using and training embedding and reranker models for applications like retrieval augmented generation, semantic search, and more. With the v6.0 update, it gains a fourth model type: `MultiVectorEncoder`, for ColBERT-style late interaction retrieval. Any [PyLate](https://github.com/lightonai/pylate) checkpoint and any [Stanford-NLP ColBERT](https://github.com/stanford-futuredata/ColBERT) checkpoint loads straight into it, and [colpali-engine](https://github.com/illuin-tech/colpali) models for visual document retrieval can be used too, through the same familiar API you already use for dense, sparse, and reranker models.

Reviewer: Would it be better if we turned this paragraph into be a TL;DR section before an "Introduction" section? This would serve the following:
1. Audience from this world will be very excited to read the blog
2. Audience who are new to this, would start reading the introduction of the blog with the meaning of the late interaction retrieval and not jargons that might intimidate them.

Author: Hmm, normally I like tl;dr's, but I feel like the introduction already does a pretty good job of informing the user what this is:
> Sentence Transformers is .... With the v6.0 update, ...

I do agree that the 2nd paragraph might be a bit scary, but I think I'd like to leave it as-is here.

Where a regular embedding model compresses a whole text into one vector, a multi-vector model keeps **one vector per token** and scores query against document with the MaxSim operator. That preserves token-level matching information that a single vector has to average away, which usually means stronger retrieval at the cost of a bigger index. It's also the state of the art for visual document retrieval, where a text query is matched against page images directly, with no OCR step in between.

> [PyLate](https://github.com/lightonai/pylate) comes up throughout this post, so briefly: Sentence Transformers handled dense and sparse models but not late interaction, and LightOn built PyLate on top of it to close that gap. Much of what you'll load here was trained with PyLate, and an ecosystem grew up around it, [fast-plaid](https://github.com/lightonai/fast-plaid) included. With v6.0, those capabilities land in Sentence Transformers itself.

Reviewer 2: I understand this is meant to be clarifying, but I'm still confused: "late interaction" has not been introduced yet, and I don't know what PyLate or fast-plaid do or if I'm supposed to use them or go to sentence transformers. It's also not super obvious that they were created by LightOn AI in my opinion (there's only the github link in the case of fast-plaid).

Author: Yeah, totally agreed. I've moved this down now, below where we explain dense vs cross-encoder vs multi-vector/late-interaction in 1326de0a52142f405f1f63d84c2c54d1a3527458

Author: And also added that these are by LightOn

In this blogpost, we'll show you how to use these models: loading the various checkpoint formats, encoding and scoring, plugging them into a search stack, running them on page images, and keeping the index affordable.

> <!--
> > [!TIP]
> > If you want to train your own multi-vector models, check out the companion blogpost: [Training and Finetuning Multi-Vector Embedding Models with Sentence Transformers](https://huggingface.co/blog/train-multi-vector-encoder).
> -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!TIP]
> If you want to train your own multi-vector models, check out the companion blogpost: [Training and Finetuning Multi-Vector Embedding Models with Sentence Transformers](https://huggingface.co/blog/train-multi-vector-encoder).
```

Author: This blogpost doesn't exist yet! I'm planning it for next week or in 2 weeks, depending on how quickly I can set up a training example worth showcasing. But I'd like to get it out to mirror these:
* https://huggingface.co/blog/train-sentence-transformers
* https://huggingface.co/blog/train-reranker
* https://huggingface.co/blog/train-sparse-encoder

* [Additional Resources](#additional-resources)

## What are Multi-Vector Models?

A dense embedding model reads a text and returns a single fixed-size vector. Everything the model noticed has to fit in those 384, 768, or 1024 numbers, and similarity is one dot product between two such summaries. This works remarkably well, but the compression is lossy in a specific way: a rare entity, an exact identifier, or one crucial clause in a long passage all have to compete for room in the same vector. A query with several requirements at once runs into the same wall. For "green sofa with wooden legs and rounded cushions", a single vector has to blend all four into one point, so a green sofa with the wrong legs ends up sitting close to the one you actually asked for.

A multi-vector model (also called a late-interaction or ColBERT-style model, after the [ColBERT paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.12832)) skips that compression. It runs the same transformer, but instead of pooling the token embeddings into one vector, it projects each token embedding down to a small dimension (classically 128) and keeps all of them. A 9-token document becomes a 9x128 matrix, not a 1x128 vector.

> The interaction between query and document is then deferred until scoring time, which is where the name "late interaction" comes from. A cross-encoder interacts early: both texts go through the model together, which is accurate but leaves nothing to precompute, since every document has to be re-encoded for each new query. A bi-encoder barely interacts at all (one dot product between two finished summaries), which is exactly what lets you encode a collection once and query it fast. Late interaction sits in between: documents are still encoded independently and can be indexed offline, but scoring compares every query token against every document token, which leaves far more room for the two to interact.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps we can relate "dense embedder model", mentioned before, with "bi-encoder" here for more clarity.

Author: Agreed, done in 1326de0a52142f405f1f63d84c2c54d1a3527458

![Dense embedding versus multi-vector late interaction: a dense model encodes each text into one vector and scores with cosine similarity, while a multi-vector model keeps one vector per token and scores every query token against every document token with MaxSim](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/multi-vector-encoder/maxsim_explainer.gif)

### The MaxSim Operator

Scoring uses MaxSim: for each query token, take its highest similarity against any document token, then sum those maxima across the query.

$$\text{MaxSim}(Q, D) = \sum_{Q_i \in Q} \max_{D_j \in D} Q_i \cdot D_j$$

Because the token embeddings are L2-normalized, each of those dot products is a cosine similarity in `[-1, 1]`, so the whole sum lands within `[-num_query_tokens, num_query_tokens]`.

You can read the operator as a soft alignment: every query token points at the one document token that best explains it, and the score is how well the document supports the query overall.

> The alignment doesn't have to be lexical, since the token embeddings are contextualized. Encode "Where do penguins live?" against "Penguins inhabit Antarctica." with [`lightonai/mLateOn`](https://huggingface.co/lightonai/mLateOn) and the query token `live` finds its best match on `inhabit` at 0.94, a word it shares no characters with! That is the thing lexical retrieval cannot do, BM25 and its relatives need the term itself, so synonyms and paraphrases slip past them. It isn't one-to-one either, since several query tokens routinely settle on the same document token. But when an exact match does matter to you (a product code, a surname, a function name), MaxSim has a token sitting right there to match it, where a single-vector model had to fold it into an average.

Reviewer 2: The first part is common to all embedding models, isn't it? The second part about retrieving exact matches seems to state the opposite pattern: sometimes we are interested in retrieving exact matches.

Reviewer 2: Also, maybe replace `fold` with something like "encode" or "aggregate", it smells of Claude a bit imo.

Author: Also rewrote this to clarify that late-interaction / MVE can do both synonyms/typos as well as exact matches in 1326de0a52142f405f1f63d84c2c54d1a3527458

### What You Gain, and What It Costs

> You gain retrieval quality, particularly on queries where one specific piece of a document is what makes it relevant, on multi-requirement queries like the sofa above where each requirement gets to find its own evidence, and on out-of-domain data where a dense model's compression was tuned for a different distribution. That compression is learned from the training queries, so the model discards whatever those never asked for, and your production queries may well ask for it. The effect grows with document length, since more text has to fit in the same fixed vector.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You gain retrieval quality, particularly on queries where one specific piece of a document is what makes it relevant, on multi-requirement queries like the sofa above where each requirement gets to find its own evidence, and on out-of-domain data where a dense model's compression was tuned for a different distribution. That compression is learned from the training queries, so the model will in practice discard queries that were never asked for, while your production queries may well ask for them. The effect grows with document length, since more text has to fit in the same fixed vector.
```

This is great insight!

Author: Yeah that was a confusing sentence, rewrote in 1326de0a52142f405f1f63d84c2c54d1a3527458

The cost is index size. One vector per token instead of one vector per document is a lot more vectors, only partly offset by the smaller dimension. Encoding 4,874 Natural Questions passages with [`lightonai/LateOn`](https://huggingface.co/lightonai/LateOn) produced 608,414 token vectors, an average of 124.8 per passage:

> | Representation | Vectors | Dimensions | float32 index |

Reviewer 2: In the light of the comments below about compressing indexes, maybe we can call the last column "float32 size" instead, as it represents the full vector.

Author: Agreed, done in 1326de0a52142f405f1f63d84c2c54d1a3527458

| --- | ---: | ---: | ---: |
| Dense, [`all-MiniLM-L6-v2`](https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/all-MiniLM-L6-v2) | 4,874 | 384 | 7.5 MB |
| Dense, [`gte-modernbert-base`](https://huggingface.co/Alibaba-NLP/gte-modernbert-base) | 4,874 | 768 | 15.0 MB |
| Multi-vector, `LateOn` | 608,414 | 128 | 311.5 MB |

> That's about 42x the storage of the MiniLM index, or 62 KiB per passage. However, indexes are often compressed, e.g. the same 608,414 vectors take 88 MB as a [fast-plaid](#indexing) index, since PLAID stores a centroid id plus a quantized residual per vector rather than the vector itself. [Token Pooling](#token-pooling) cuts the vector count before any of that, and [Retrieve and Rerank](#retrieve-and-rerank) avoids building an index at all.

Reviewer 3: This is cool! I might be also nice to note that using a dense model such as Qwen/Qwen3-Embedding-8B which has 4096-dim vectors would cost about 4874 * 4096 * 4bytes (fp32) = ~ 76 MB for this corpus, which is very close to PLAID 88 MB. It goes to show that with a good indexing strategy we might achieve similar size indexes to the existing dense counterparts that people already use.

Author: Cool idea, and I'm fine with it. I also updated the numbers to MB instead of MiB: 8ad29338a3bb11e84cb4b33b4c5d485a13dba8ca

With the tradeoff in mind, let's get a model running.

## Installation

Multi-vector models work with a plain install:

```bash
pip install -U sentence-transformers
```

For ColPali-style visual document retrieval, you also need the image dependencies (see [Installation](https://sbert.net/docs/installation.html) for all extras, and [Multimodal Embedding & Reranker Models](https://huggingface.co/blog/multimodal-sentence-transformers) for multimodal support in general):

```bash
pip install -U "sentence-transformers[image]"
```

> [!NOTE]
> Sentence Transformers v6.0 requires `transformers` v5.x, `torch` 2.2+, and `huggingface-hub` v1.x. If you pin any of those lower, plan the upgrade first. See the [Migration Guide](https://sbert.net/docs/migration_guide.html) for the full list of breaking changes.

## Loading a Model

Loading a multi-vector model looks exactly like loading any other Sentence Transformers model:

```python
from sentence_transformers import MultiVectorEncoder

model = MultiVectorEncoder("lightonai/LateOn")
```

> To find models that work, look for the [`sentence-transformers` tag](https://huggingface.co/models?library=sentence-transformers&other=multi-vector) on the Hub. Anything carrying it loads with the line above, whether it started life as a PyLate checkpoint, a Stanford-NLP ColBERT checkpoint, or a ColPali-family model for visual document retrieval. We're working through the ecosystem to get that tag onto every model that works, so the list keeps growing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To find models that work, look for the [`multi-vector` and `sentence-transformers` tags](https://huggingface.co/models?library=sentence-transformers&other=multi-vector) on the Hub. Any model with them can be loaded with the line above, whether it started life as a PyLate checkpoint, a Stanford-NLP ColBERT checkpoint, or a ColPali-family model for visual document retrieval. We're working through the ecosystem to get that tag onto every model that works, so the list keeps growing.
```

Author: Important indeed, thanks, done in 1326de0a52142f405f1f63d84c2c54d1a3527458

```python
from sentence_transformers import MultiVectorEncoder

model = MultiVectorEncoder("colbert-ir/colbertv2.0")
print(model)
"""
MultiVectorEncoder(
  (0): Transformer({..., 'document_length': 180,
                    'query_expansion': {'strategy': 'fixed', 'attend': False, 'token': None, 'length': 32}})
  (1): Dense({'in_features': 768, 'out_features': 128, 'bias': False, ...})
  (2): MultiVectorMask({'skiplist_words': ['!', '"', '#', ...], 'skiplist_tasks': ['document'], ...})
  (3): Normalize({...})
)
"""
print(model.prompts)
# {'query': '[unused0] ', 'document': '[unused1] '}
```

That's the classic ColBERT pipeline: a `Transformer` producing contextualized token embeddings, a token-level `Dense` projecting each of them to 128 dimensions, a `MultiVectorMask` deciding which tokens count during scoring, and a token-level `Normalize`. Other checkpoints fill in different values. `lightonai/GTE-ModernColBERT-v1` uses the same four modules with `[Q] ` and `[D] ` prompts, no query expansion, and caps of 48 and 300.

> You rarely need to touch any of this, since every released checkpoint configures its own. It matters when you build a model from a bare backbone, which is covered in [Creating Custom Models](https://sbert.net/docs/multi_vector_encoder/usage/custom_models.html).

Reviewer 3: Since most LI models are trained on short passages/queries I would add here that you can configure a longer query len/doc len to improve results on more realistic setups where for example a doclen of 300 tokens might be too small to cover longer chunks

Author: Hmm, I do understand and I mostly agree, but I do feel like it's a bit of a bad practice to override these model author settings. But perhaps it shouldn't be, e.g. with https://huggingface.co/tencent/EVIE-Preview-4.5B there's also a default max visual token count, but that can be increased if the user has enough VRAM for better performance 🤔. I'll think on it for a bit.

Author: Done in bbf756253e8ac2dc72a167336cf994a7d9ee22af, seems nice I think

## Encoding Queries and Documents

Multi-vector models are asymmetric: queries and documents go through different prefixes, different length caps, and different scoring masks. Unlike many dense models, where the two are interchangeable, [`encode_query()`](https://sbert.net/docs/package_reference/multi_vector_encoder/model.html#sentence_transformers.multi_vector_encoder.model.MultiVectorEncoder.encode_query) and [`encode_document()`](https://sbert.net/docs/package_reference/multi_vector_encoder/model.html#sentence_transformers.multi_vector_encoder.model.MultiVectorEncoder.encode_document) are required to get correct embeddings:

```python
from sentence_transformers import MultiVectorEncoder

model = MultiVectorEncoder("lightonai/mLateOn")

queries = ["What is the capital of France?"]
documents = [
    "Paris is the capital of France.",
    "Berlin is the capital of Germany.",
]

query_embeddings = model.encode_query(queries)
document_embeddings = model.encode_document(documents)

print(query_embeddings[0].shape)
# (10, 128)
print(document_embeddings[0].shape, document_embeddings[1].shape)
# (10, 128) (10, 128)
```

> Note what you get back: a *list* of 2D tensors, one per input, each of shape `(num_tokens, embedding_dim)`. Unlike dense embeddings, you can't stack these into one rectangular tensor, because every input has its own token count. These two documents happen to tokenize to the same length, but a longer passage would produce a taller matrix.

Reviewer 2: Lol, how unfortunate that everything resolves to `10`. Perhaps we could change at least one of the documents?

Author: Haha true, updated it in 1326de0a52142f405f1f63d84c2c54d1a3527458. Now it's (19, 128)

## Retrieve and Rerank

You can also get late-interaction quality without maintaining a late-interaction index, by using a multi-vector model as your *reranker*. A fast bi-encoder narrows a large corpus to a handful of candidates, then the multi-vector model rescores only those:

```python
from datasets import load_dataset

from sentence_transformers import MultiVectorEncoder, SentenceTransformer
from sentence_transformers.util import semantic_search

dataset = load_dataset("sentence-transformers/natural-questions", split="train[:50000]")
corpus = list(dict.fromkeys(dataset["answer"]))

# First stage: index the corpus once with a fast bi-encoder
retriever = SentenceTransformer("jinaai/jina-embeddings-v5-text-nano-retrieval")
corpus_embeddings = retriever.encode_document(corpus, convert_to_tensor=True, show_progress_bar=True)

# Second stage: rescore the candidates with MaxSim

> reranker = MultiVectorEncoder("perplexity-ai/pplx-embed-v1-late-0.6b", trust_remote_code=True)

Reviewer 2: Maybe instantiate the reranker after the top 50 have been retrieved (or at the very beginning after the retriever is loaded). So the encode -> top-k -> rerank flow is super clean.

Author: Done, now the 2 models load in 2 lines, looks super clean 😄 1326de0a52142f405f1f63d84c2c54d1a3527458

# Retrieve the top 50
query = "when did richmond last play in a preliminary final"
hits = semantic_search(retriever.encode_query([query], convert_to_tensor=True), corpus_embeddings, top_k=50)[0]
candidates = [corpus[hit["corpus_id"]] for hit in hits]

# And rerank them with the multi-vector model
query_embeddings = reranker.encode_query([query])
document_embeddings = reranker.encode_document(candidates)

> scores = reranker.similarity(query_embeddings, document_embeddings)[0]

Reviewer 2: Could we potentially use something like fast-plaid to encode all documents with the MultiVectorEncoder once, but here retrieve the vectors for the relevant documents selected by the dense model?

Author: Yes, but if you carry a full multi-vector index in fast-plaid or the likes, then you might get a stronger setup if you exclusively use a MultiVectorEncoder model and no reranking. I'm not 100% sure about all of the timings though.

for index in scores.argsort(descending=True)[:3].tolist():
    print(f"{scores[index].item():.4f}  {candidates[index][:100]}")
```

> Only the 50 candidates are ever encoded as multi-vectors, so your index stays a normal dense index and the token vectors are transient. This is the same role a cross-encoder plays in a retrieve-and-rerank stack, but a multi-vector model is considerably cheaper per candidate. You encode the documents in one batch and score them with a matrix multiplication, instead of one forward pass per query-document pair. The runnable script is [retrieve_rerank.py](https://github.com/huggingface/sentence-transformers/blob/main/examples/multi_vector_encoder/applications/retrieve_rerank.py), which prints the timings of both stages.

Reviewer 2: Ah, I see encoding is cheap so my previous question probably makes no sense. Nice!

Author: Yess, cheap enough to do on the fly for the top e.g. 50.

model = MultiVectorEncoder(
    "vidore/colqwen-omni-v0.1",
    model_kwargs={"dtype": torch.bfloat16},
)
print(model.modalities)
# ['text', 'image', 'audio', 'video', 'message']

# 20 recorded conversations, averaging 28 seconds each
dataset = load_dataset("eustlb/dailytalk-conversations-grouped", split="train[:20]")
dataset = dataset.cast_column("audio", Audio(sampling_rate=16_000))
audio = [row["array"] for row in dataset["audio"]]  # raw mono waveforms, float32 at 16 kHz

query_embeddings = model.encode_query(["medicine for car nausea"])
document_embeddings = model.encode_document(audio, batch_size=2)
scores = model.similarity(query_embeddings, document_embeddings)[0]

top_scores, top_indices = scores.topk(3)
for score, index in zip(top_scores.tolist(), top_indices.tolist()):
    print(f"{score:.4f}  {' / '.join(dataset[index]['texts'][:2])}")
"""
50.8902  Excuse me? Do you have anything for a carsickness? / Yes, but you look fine.
46.1028  Excuse me, could you tell me where you have got that music book? / Certainly. Let me see. Oh, it's on that shelf.
46.0514  Jeff, I'm going to the supermarket. Do you want to come with me? / I think the supermarket is closed now.
"""
```

> ColQwen-Omni was trained purely on image-text pairs, so its audio retrieval is zero-shot: it never heard a training example, and there is no transcription step anywhere in the pipeline. The query says `nausea` where the recording says `carsickness`, and it still picks the pharmacy conversation out of twenty by a wide margin.

Reviewer 2: This is quite impressive.

  query token       best document token      sim   share
  when              since                 0.9154    7.4%
  did               had                   0.9675    7.8%
  rich              rich                  0.9764    7.9%
  mond              mond                  0.9856    8.0%
  last              to                    0.9249    7.5%
  play              game                  0.9384    7.6%
  in                the                   0.9732    7.9%
  a                 a                     0.9587    7.8%
  preliminary       preliminary           0.9394    7.6%
  final             final                 0.9654    7.8%
  --------------------------------------------------------
  3 special tokens                        2.8038   22.7%
  MaxSim score                           12.3489  100.0%
```

`rich`, `mond`, `preliminary`, and `final` matched themselves, while `when` settled on `since` and `play` on `game`. The special tokens are worth noticing too: three of them contribute 22.7% of the score while carrying none of the query's content. Below this table the script prints the passage itself, with the winning tokens highlighted in place.

## Token Pooling

> If the index footprint worries you, the most effective knob is to store fewer token vectors. `HierarchicalTokenPooling` implements the [token pooling](https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.14683v1) technique from Clavié, Chaffin, and Adams: it clusters each document's token vectors with Ward linkage on cosine distance and replaces each cluster with its mean, keeping roughly `1 / pool_factor` of the tokens. Within one document a lot of token vectors end up close to each other, so much of what you drop is redundancy rather than signal:

Reviewer 2: Amazing. So a dense embedder would be a degenerate version that produces just one vector 😂

Author: Haha it would be actually, set the pool_factor to infinity and you get one tiny vector 😆

## Speeding Up Inference

Multi-vector models run through the same backend machinery as the rest of Sentence Transformers, so you get `torch` (default), `onnx`, and `openvino`, alongside half precision, Flash Attention, and `torch.compile`.

On GPU, fp16 with Flash Attention is the best configuration we measured, at 2.44x the throughput of fp32 with no measurable retrieval quality loss. Flash Attention helps multi-vector models more than most, because documents are only truncated and never padded to a shared length, so your batches have widely varying sequence lengths that unpadding can exploit:

```python
from sentence_transformers import MultiVectorEncoder

model = MultiVectorEncoder(
    "lightonai/GTE-ModernColBERT-v1",
    model_kwargs={"attn_implementation": "flash_attention_2", "dtype": "float16"},
)
```

<div style="display: flex; flex-wrap: wrap; gap: 16px; justify-content: center;">
  <figure style="flex: 1 1 300px; min-width: 0; margin: 0; text-align: center;">

>     <a href="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/multi-vector-encoder/mve_backends_benchmark_gpu.png"><img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/multi-vector-encoder/mve_backends_benchmark_gpu.png" alt="Multi-vector backend benchmarks on GPU" style="width: 100%;" /></a>

Reviewer 2: It took me a bit to understand the bottom row of the figure. Perhaps we could use something like "quality" instead of performance so it doesn't look like it's speed related. We could also reduce the y scale so we see that all results are effectively lossless.

Author: Hmm, yeah, I understand what you mean. I'll add some text below to clarify. 
It's a bit out of scope for me to fix this, as these same figures exist for all 4 archetypes, and then I'd like to regenerate for all 4. I'll make a quick issue about this for after the release.

Author: https://github.com/huggingface/sentence-transformers/issues/3950

| `processor.process_images(...)` + `model(**batch)` | `model.encode_document(images)` |
| `processor.score_multi_vector(qs, ds)` | `model.similarity(query_embeddings, document_embeddings)` |
| `mask_non_image_embeddings=True` | `MultiVectorMask(keep_only_token_ids=[...])` |
| `HierarchicalTokenPooler` | `HierarchicalTokenPooling` |
| `colpali_engine.interpretability` | `sentence_transformers.multi_vector_encoder.interpretability` |

One difference worth calling out: on a **bare** (non-ColBERT) checkpoint, PyLate's `ColBERT("bert-base-uncased")` applies the classic recipe by default, while `MultiVectorEncoder("bert-base-uncased")` builds a plain stack and leaves the prefixes, query expansion, and skiplist as explicit choices. The training loss and evaluator equivalents, and the data-handling differences, are in the [Migration Guide](https://sbert.net/docs/migration_guide.html#migrating-from-pylate).

Note that save compatibility is one-way in every case: PyLate, Stanford-NLP ColBERT, and colpali-engine checkpoints all load into `MultiVectorEncoder`, but `MultiVectorEncoder.save_pretrained` output isn't loadable by any of them.

## Supported Models

> The [`sentence-transformers` tag](https://huggingface.co/models?library=sentence-transformers&other=multi-vector) on the Hub is the list that stays current, and we're working to get it onto every model that works. The tables below are what we test against directly, so treat them as a starting point rather than the full set. For text retrieval in particular, any PyLate or Stanford-NLP ColBERT checkpoint loads whether or not it carries the tag yet.

Reviewer 2: (same comment about mentioning the `multi-vector` tag as well)

Author: Also done in 1326de0a52142f405f1f63d84c2c54d1a3527458

| [vidore/colSmol-500M](https://huggingface.co/vidore/colSmol-500M) | 507M | 128 | 0.3459 | - |
| [vidore/colSmol-256M](https://huggingface.co/vidore/colSmol-256M) | 256M | 128 | 0.2673 | - |
| [ModernVBERT/colmodernvbert](https://huggingface.co/ModernVBERT/colmodernvbert) | 252M | 128 | 0.2632 | - |
| [vidore/colpali-v1.2-hf](https://huggingface.co/vidore/colpali-v1.2-hf) | 2.9B | 128 | - | - |
| [vidore/colqwen2-v1.0-hf](https://huggingface.co/vidore/colqwen2-v1.0-hf) | 2.2B | 128 | - | - |

Most of these are LoRA adapter repositories, with the adapter applied directly onto its base at load time. Some also have a `-merged` sibling on the Hub (e.g. [vidore/colpali-v1.3-merged](https://huggingface.co/vidore/colpali-v1.3-merged)) with the adapter already folded into the weights.

The three `-hf` entries are the transformers-native `*ForRetrieval` ports. They load without any configuration, but use more modeling from `transformers` and less from `sentence_transformers`. Generally, it's preferable to use the original models instead, as the ports score approximately the same.

## Acknowledgements

> Late interaction in Sentence Transformers rests on a lot of earlier work. Thanks to Omar Khattab and Matei Zaharia for [ColBERT](https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.12832), which everything here descends from, and to the LightOn team (Antoine Chaffin, Raphael Sourty, Paulo Moura, and Amélie Chatelain) for [PyLate](https://github.com/lightonai/pylate) and [fast-plaid](https://github.com/lightonai/fast-plaid), which carried late interaction for years and shaped a good deal of the API described above.

Reviewer 2: ❤️

- [Installation](https://sbert.net/docs/installation.html)
- [Migration Guide](https://sbert.net/docs/migration_guide.html)

### Example Scripts

- [Semantic Search](https://github.com/huggingface/sentence-transformers/blob/main/examples/multi_vector_encoder/applications/semantic_search.py)
- [Retrieve and Rerank](https://github.com/huggingface/sentence-transformers/blob/main/examples/multi_vector_encoder/applications/retrieve_rerank.py)
- [Token Pooling](https://github.com/huggingface/sentence-transformers/blob/main/examples/multi_vector_encoder/compression/token_pooling.py)
- [ColPali Heatmaps](https://github.com/huggingface/sentence-transformers/blob/main/examples/multi_vector_encoder/interpretability/heatmap.py)
- [Text Similarity Maps](https://github.com/huggingface/sentence-transformers/blob/main/examples/multi_vector_encoder/interpretability/text_similarity_map.py)
- [NanoBEIR Evaluation](https://github.com/huggingface/sentence-transformers/blob/main/examples/multi_vector_encoder/evaluation/nano_beir.py)

### Training

To learn how to train or finetune these models on your own data:

> <!--
> See the companion blogpost: [Training and Finetuning Multi-Vector Embedding Models with Sentence Transformers](https://huggingface.co/blog/train-multi-vector-encoder).
> -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
> See the companion blogpost: [Training and Finetuning Multi-Vector Embedding Models with Sentence Transformers](https://huggingface.co/blog/train-multi-vector-encoder).
```

- [Multi-Vector Encoder > Training Overview](https://sbert.net/docs/multi_vector_encoder/training_overview.html)
- [Multi-Vector Encoder > Loss Overview](https://sbert.net/docs/multi_vector_encoder/loss_overview.html)
- [Multi-Vector Encoder > Training Examples](https://sbert.net/docs/multi_vector_encoder/training/examples.html)
- [LateOn and mLateOn training scripts](https://github.com/lightonai/mdenseon-mlateon): LightOn's PyLate recipes for LateOn, mLateOn, DenseOn, and mDenseOn, where the finetuning scripts show practical details like splitting a 16,384-example batch into mini-batches of 16.

### Hugging Face Hub

- [Multi-vector models on the Hub](https://huggingface.co/models?library=sentence-transformers&other=multi-vector)
- [Sentence Transformers datasets on the Hub](https://huggingface.co/datasets?other=sentence-transformers)

### Companion Blogposts

> <!--
> - [Training and Finetuning Multi-Vector Embedding Models with Sentence Transformers](https://huggingface.co/blog/train-multi-vector-encoder): the direct training companion to this post.
> -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
> [Training and Finetuning Multi-Vector Embedding Models with Sentence Transformers](https://huggingface.co/blog/train-multi-vector-encoder): the direct training companion to this post.
```

[Sentence Transformers](https://sbert.net/) is a Python library for using and training embedding and reranker models for applications like retrieval augmented generation, semantic search, and more. With the v6.0 update, it gains a fourth model type: `MultiVectorEncoder`, for ColBERT-style late interaction retrieval. Any [PyLate](https://github.com/lightonai/pylate) checkpoint and any [Stanford-NLP ColBERT](https://github.com/stanford-futuredata/ColBERT) checkpoint loads straight into it, and [colpali-engine](https://github.com/illuin-tech/colpali) models for visual document retrieval can be used too, through the same familiar API you already use for dense, sparse, and reranker models.

Where a regular embedding model compresses a whole text into one vector, a multi-vector model keeps **one vector per token** and scores query against document with the MaxSim operator. That preserves token-level matching information that a single vector has to average away, which usually means stronger retrieval at the cost of a bigger index. It's also the state of the art for visual document retrieval, where a text query is matched against page images directly, with no OCR step in between.

> In this blogpost, we'll show you how to use these models: loading the various checkpoint formats, encoding and scoring, plugging them into a search stack, running them on page images, and keeping the index affordable.

Reviewer 4: LGTM this is a nice intro so far

-->

## Table of Contents

* [What are Multi-Vector Models?](#what-are-multi-vector-models)
    + [The MaxSim Operator](#the-maxsim-operator)
    + [What You Gain, and What It Costs](#what-you-gain-and-what-it-costs)
* [Installation](#installation)
* [Loading a Model](#loading-a-model)
    + [Inspecting What a Checkpoint Configured](#inspecting-what-a-checkpoint-configured)
* [Encoding Queries and Documents](#encoding-queries-and-documents)
* [Scoring with MaxSim](#scoring-with-maxsim)
    + [Score Magnitude and MeanMaxSim](#score-magnitude-and-meanmaxsim)
* [Semantic Search](#semantic-search)
* [Retrieve and Rerank](#retrieve-and-rerank)
* [Indexing](#indexing)
* [Visual Document Retrieval](#visual-document-retrieval)
* [Interpretability](#interpretability)
* [Token Pooling](#token-pooling)
* [Speeding Up Inference](#speeding-up-inference)
* [Evaluating a Model](#evaluating-a-model)
* [Coming from PyLate or colpali-engine](#coming-from-pylate-or-colpali-engine)
* [Supported Models](#supported-models)
* [Additional Resources](#additional-resources)

## What are Multi-Vector Models?

> A dense embedding model reads a text and returns a single fixed-size vector. Everything the model noticed has to fit in those 384, 768, or 1024 numbers, and similarity is one dot product between two such summaries. This works remarkably well, but the compression is lossy in a specific way: a rare entity, an exact identifier, or one crucial clause in a long passage all have to compete for room in the same vector.

Reviewer 4: This is very clear, a main motivation to me is to handle multiples criterions in the query as in LIMIT dataset

I'm often providing exemples such as e-commerce queries: "green sofa with wooden legs and rounded cushions" which I think multi-vector models shines on

Author: Done in b82ed97b3a252a5d2b7f8da027170e7fb390cbe8, good example

The interaction between query and document is then deferred until scoring time, which is where the name "late interaction" comes from. A cross-encoder interacts early (both texts go through the model together, which is accurate but too slow to precompute). A bi-encoder barely interacts at all (one dot product between two finished summaries). Late interaction sits in between: documents are still encoded independently and can be indexed offline, but scoring compares every query token against every document token.

![Dense embedding versus multi-vector late interaction: a dense model encodes each text into one vector and scores with cosine similarity, while a multi-vector model keeps one vector per token and scores every query token against every document token with MaxSim](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/multi-vector-encoder/maxsim_explainer.gif)

### The MaxSim Operator

Scoring uses MaxSim: for each query token, take its highest similarity against any document token, then sum those maxima across the query.

$$\text{MaxSim}(Q, D) = \sum_{i=1}^{|Q|} \max_{j=1}^{|D|} Q_i \cdot D_j$$

> Because the token embeddings are L2-normalized, each of those dot products is a cosine similarity in `[-1, 1]`, so the sum lands in `[-|Q|, |Q|]`.

Reviewer 4: I would define |Q| here :) 

`where `|Q|` is the number of tokens within the query`

Author: Simplified in b82ed97b3a252a5d2b7f8da027170e7fb390cbe8

### What You Gain, and What It Costs

You gain retrieval quality, particularly on queries where one specific piece of a document is what makes it relevant, and on out-of-domain data where a dense model's compression was tuned for a different distribution.

The cost is index size. One vector per token instead of one vector per document is a lot more vectors, only partly offset by the smaller dimension. Encoding 4,874 Natural Questions passages with [`lightonai/LateOn`](https://huggingface.co/lightonai/LateOn) produced 608,414 token vectors, an average of 124.8 per passage:

| Representation | Vectors | Dimensions | float32 index |
| --- | ---: | ---: | ---: |
| Dense, [`all-MiniLM-L6-v2`](https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/all-MiniLM-L6-v2) | 4,874 | 384 | 7.5 MB |
| Dense, [`gte-modernbert-base`](https://huggingface.co/Alibaba-NLP/gte-modernbert-base) | 4,874 | 768 | 15.0 MB |

> | Multi-vector, `LateOn` | 608,414 | 128 | 311.5 MB |

Reviewer 4: Would it be useful to mention the index size with PLAID as well? We could add another column to the table, or a short paragraph below it noting that dedicated indexes can reduce the storage cost, without going into detail. What do you think?

Author: Done! b82ed97b3a252a5d2b7f8da027170e7fb390cbe8

Author: P.s. I kept it out of the table: dense indexes can also compress.

fast-plaid, Qdrant, Weaviate, and Vespa all take exactly what `encode_document` returns, so the code is the same up to the client library. Here's a working snippet for each, run against the 4,874 passages and 608,414 token vectors from the [Semantic Search](#semantic-search) example. Each one carries the ingestion and query times it produced on one machine (RTX 3090, i7-13700K), with no tuning beyond what the code shows, to give a sense of the shape of the work. All four answer the query faster than the 98ms `model.similarity` took in that section, and three of them do it on the CPU, since fast-plaid is the only one here using the GPU.

All four returned the same three passages in the same order as the exhaustive PyTorch MaxSim earlier in this post, and the three databases reproduce its scores to four decimals! That is because their snippets score every document, which is affordable at this size and removes approximation as a variable. fast-plaid is approximate by design, so its scores differ slightly. The notes under each one say what changes when you switch to an approximate index, which is where rankings start to drift.

<details>
<summary><b>fast-plaid</b></summary>

> [fast-plaid](https://github.com/lightonai/fast-plaid) is LightOn's Rust implementation of PLAID, the index ColBERT was originally built around. There's no server to start, and it reads the tensors `encode_document` hands back without any conversion.

Reviewer 4: Would it be worth mentioning that fast-plaid persists the index to disk, so it can be reopened and reused rather than rebuilt each time?

Author: For sure, done in b82ed97b3a252a5d2b7f8da027170e7fb390cbe8.

Reviewer 2: Good idea. For my own curiosity, is the index small enough to always reside in memory?

Reviewer 4: @pcuenca the index itself is designed to write everything on disk and perform memory mapping. Still the centroids are stored in memory when loading / initialising the index

]

query_embeddings = model.encode_query(queries)
document_embeddings = model.encode_document(images)
print(query_embeddings[0].shape, document_embeddings[0].shape)
# (25, 128) (755, 128)

scores = model.similarity(query_embeddings, document_embeddings)
print(scores)
# tensor([[13.7065, 11.3266, 11.2454, 10.2928],
#         [ 7.2340, 15.9825,  6.8053,  6.3357]])
```

Each query retrieves its own page (the diagonal), and the second query separates much more cleanly than the first, since only one of the four pages is about outlay over time.

The code is unchanged. Underneath, the processor handles the visual prompt and the image patches, and MaxSim scores query text tokens against document image patches. A page holds many separate regions, which is exactly what makes late interaction a natural fit here, since a single vector would have to average a chart, a table, and three paragraphs into one summary. That fidelity costs index space, though. The shapes above are 755 token vectors for one page against 25 for the query, where a Natural Questions passage from earlier averaged about 125, so [token pooling](#token-pooling) is worth reaching for earlier here than it is for text.

> Page images are the common case, but they're not the only non-text modality. Sentence Transformers accepts text, images, audio, and video, and a checkpoint supports whichever of those its processor does, which `model.modalities` reports. [vidore/colqwen-omni-v0.1](https://huggingface.co/vidore/colqwen-omni-v0.1) is built on Qwen2.5-Omni, for example, so it also embeds audio documents through the same `encode_document` call, passed as file paths, arrays, or `torchcodec` decoder objects. A single document can combine modalities too, by passing a dict like `{"text": ..., "image": ...}` in place of a bare value.

Reviewer 4: Would'nt be cool to showcase an audio retrieval example ? Unless it's too verbose ofc 🤘😃

Author: Totally agreed, done in b82ed97b3a252a5d2b7f8da027170e7fb390cbe8

* [Additional Resources](#additional-resources)

## What are Multi-Vector Models?

A dense embedding model reads a text and returns a single fixed-size vector. Everything the model noticed has to fit in those 384, 768, or 1024 numbers, and similarity is one dot product between two such summaries. This works remarkably well, but the compression is lossy in a specific way: a rare entity, an exact identifier, or one crucial clause in a long passage all have to compete for room in the same vector. A query with several requirements at once runs into the same wall. For "green sofa with wooden legs and rounded cushions", a single vector has to blend all four into one point, so a green sofa with the wrong legs ends up sitting close to the one you actually asked for.

A multi-vector model (also called a late-interaction or ColBERT-style model, after the [ColBERT paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.12832)) skips that compression. It runs the same transformer, but instead of pooling the token embeddings into one vector, it projects each token embedding down to a small dimension (classically 128) and keeps all of them. A 9-token document becomes a 9x128 matrix, not a 1x128 vector.

> The interaction between query and document is then deferred until scoring time, which is where the name "late interaction" comes from. A cross-encoder interacts early (both texts go through the model together, which is accurate but too slow to precompute). A bi-encoder barely interacts at all (one dot product between two finished summaries). Late interaction sits in between: documents are still encoded independently and can be indexed offline, but scoring compares every query token against every document token.

Reviewer 5: > but too slow to precompute

but we cannot precompute anything as the user query is required for encoding, making it too slow to apply at scale

Reviewer 5: > A bi-encoder barely interacts at all (one dot product between two finished summaries)
, but allows to precompute all the documents representations, enabling the indexation of large collections and fast querying.

Reviewer 5: > but scoring compares every query token against every document token.

, enabling more interaction and thus increasing the capacity.

![Dense embedding versus multi-vector late interaction: a dense model encodes each text into one vector and scores with cosine similarity, while a multi-vector model keeps one vector per token and scores every query token against every document token with MaxSim](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/blog/multi-vector-encoder/maxsim_explainer.gif)

### The MaxSim Operator

Scoring uses MaxSim: for each query token, take its highest similarity against any document token, then sum those maxima across the query.

$$\text{MaxSim}(Q, D) = \sum_{Q_i \in Q} \max_{D_j \in D} Q_i \cdot D_j$$

Because the token embeddings are L2-normalized, each of those dot products is a cosine similarity in `[-1, 1]`, so the whole sum lands within `[-num_query_tokens, num_query_tokens]`.

> You can read the operator as a soft alignment: every query token points at the one document token that best explains it, and the score is how well the document explains the query overall.

Reviewer 5: explains and supports the query overall.

Author: I didn't end up taking this one iirc.

> The alignment doesn't have to be lexical, since the token embeddings are contextualized. Encode "Where do penguins live?" against "Penguins inhabit Antarctica." with [`lightonai/mLateOn`](https://huggingface.co/lightonai/mLateOn) and the query token `live` finds its best match on `inhabit` at 0.94, a word it shares no characters with! It isn't one-to-one either, since several query tokens routinely settle on the same document token. But when an exact match does matter to you (a product code, a surname, a function name), MaxSim has a token sitting right there to match it, where a single-vector model had to fold it into an average.

Reviewer 5: a word it shares no characters with! This thus overcomes the main limitation of traditional lexical approaches that requires an exact match and thus fail with synonyms or other languages.

Author: Done in 60d71bc9eef5e4fc6f1d146dd27293e74cb54e33

### What You Gain, and What It Costs

> You gain retrieval quality, particularly on queries where one specific piece of a document is what makes it relevant, on multi-requirement queries like the sofa above where each requirement gets to find its own evidence, and on out-of-domain data where a dense model's compression was tuned for a different distribution.

Reviewer 5: Indeed, the dense model has to learn the compression and thus to select what could be useful in the document during the training. It thus learns to discard information that was not required by training queries but could be very useful for production queries. This gets worse as the document gets longer, as the compression becomes more dramatic.

Author: Done in 60d71bc9eef5e4fc6f1d146dd27293e74cb54e33

| Representation | Vectors | Dimensions | float32 index |
| --- | ---: | ---: | ---: |
| Dense, [`all-MiniLM-L6-v2`](https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/all-MiniLM-L6-v2) | 4,874 | 384 | 7.5 MB |
| Dense, [`gte-modernbert-base`](https://huggingface.co/Alibaba-NLP/gte-modernbert-base) | 4,874 | 768 | 15.0 MB |
| Multi-vector, `LateOn` | 608,414 | 128 | 311.5 MB |

That's about 42x the storage of the MiniLM index, or 62 KiB per passage. However, indexes are often compressed, e.g. the same 608,414 vectors take 88 MB as a [fast-plaid](#indexing) index, since PLAID stores a centroid id plus a quantized residual per vector rather than the vector itself. [Token Pooling](#token-pooling) cuts the vector count before any of that, and [Retrieve and Rerank](#retrieve-and-rerank) avoids building an index at all.

With the tradeoff in mind, let's get a model running.

## Installation

Multi-vector models work with a plain install:

```bash
pip install -U sentence-transformers
```

> For ColPali-style visual document retrieval, you also need the image dependencies (see [Installation](https://sbert.net/docs/installation.html) for all extras):

Reviewer 5: Since sentence-transformers now also supports multimodality (link to the release), you can also use late interaction with, e.g, images (also known as ColPali). For ColPali-style...

Author: Done in 60d71bc9eef5e4fc6f1d146dd27293e74cb54e33

```bash
pip install -U "sentence-transformers[image]"
```

> [!NOTE]
> Sentence Transformers v6.0 requires `transformers` v5.x, `torch` 2.2+, and `huggingface-hub` v1.x. If you pin any of those lower, plan the upgrade first. See the [Migration Guide](https://sbert.net/docs/migration_guide.html) for the full list of breaking changes.

## Loading a Model

Loading a multi-vector model looks exactly like loading any other Sentence Transformers model:

```python
from sentence_transformers import MultiVectorEncoder

> model = MultiVectorEncoder("lightonai/GTE-ModernColBERT-v1")

Reviewer 5: I think the default in any snippet should be LateOn
It's a net gain over GTE-ModernColBERT
(i would go as far as going for mLateOn, but it's a bit bigger. LateOn is the same size as GTE (as it's the same ModernBERT backbone))

Author: Done in 60d71bc9eef5e4fc6f1d146dd27293e74cb54e33

  query token       best document token      sim   share
  when              since                 0.9154    7.4%
  did               had                   0.9675    7.8%
  rich              rich                  0.9764    7.9%
  mond              mond                  0.9856    8.0%
  last              to                    0.9249    7.5%
  play              game                  0.9384    7.6%
  in                the                   0.9732    7.9%
  a                 a                     0.9587    7.8%
  preliminary       preliminary           0.9394    7.6%
  final             final                 0.9654    7.8%
  --------------------------------------------------------
  3 special tokens                        2.8038   22.7%
  MaxSim score                           12.3489  100.0%
```

`rich`, `mond`, `preliminary`, and `final` matched themselves, while `when` settled on `since` and `play` on `game`. The special tokens are worth noticing too: three of them contribute 22.7% of the score while carrying none of the query's content. Below this table the script prints the passage itself, with the winning tokens highlighted in place.

## Token Pooling

> If the index footprint worries you, the most effective knob is to store fewer token vectors. `HierarchicalTokenPooling` implements the [token pooling](https://www.answer.ai/posts/colbert-pooling.html) technique from Answer.AI: it clusters each document's token vectors with Ward linkage on cosine similarity and replaces each cluster with its mean, keeping roughly `1 / pool_factor` of the tokens. Within one document a lot of token vectors end up close to each other, so much of what you drop is redundancy rather than signal:

Reviewer 5: > technique from Answer.AI

I take no offense, but I've worked on the paper as well 😇

Author: Done in 60d71bc9eef5e4fc6f1d146dd27293e74cb54e33

model = MultiVectorEncoder("lightonai/GTE-ModernColBERT-v1")
evaluator = MultiVectorNanoBEIREvaluator(batch_size=16)
results = evaluator(model)
print(f"{evaluator.primary_metric}: {results[evaluator.primary_metric]:.4f}")
```

This also makes it easy to check the claim from the top of this post. [`lightonai/GTE-ModernColBERT-v1`](https://huggingface.co/lightonai/GTE-ModernColBERT-v1) is a late-interaction finetune of [`Alibaba-NLP/gte-modernbert-base`](https://huggingface.co/Alibaba-NLP/gte-modernbert-base), so running both over five NanoBEIR subsets compares multi-vector against dense at the same backbone and the same parameter count:

| Model | Params | MSMARCO | NFCorpus | NQ | FiQA2018 | SciFact | Mean |
| --- | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: | :---: |
| **GTE-ModernColBERT-v1** (multi-vector, 128d) | 149M | **0.7089** | **0.3958** | **0.7719** | 0.5664 | **0.8298** | **0.6546** |
| gte-modernbert-base (dense, 768d) | 149M | 0.6446 | 0.3474 | 0.7237 | **0.6198** | 0.8203 | 0.6312 |
| all-MiniLM-L6-v2 (dense, 384d) | 23M | 0.5540 | 0.3323 | 0.5904 | 0.4775 | 0.7265 | 0.5361 |

> Late interaction wins on four of the five subsets and on the mean! FiQA2018 (financial question answering) goes the other way, which is the shape of the tradeoff you should expect: a solid gain in retrieval quality for the same model size, paid for in index footprint, rather than a universal win on every dataset.

Reviewer 5: Here again I think integrating LateOn might be better to let the people know GTE-ModernColBERT is an old model and there are better alternatives nowadays

Author: Done in c9718aa9e59a9a59b4ce98a210940d31c1b54cf0
